README.md, before:

audio-offset-finder
===================

A simple tool and library for finding the offset of an audio file within another file.

Uses cross-correlation of standardised Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients, so should be relatively robust to noise (encoding, compression, etc).  The accuracy is typically to within about 0.01s.

The tool outputs the calculated offset in seconds, and a ["standard score"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_score) representing the prominence of the chosen correlation peak.  This can be used as an estimate of the accuracy of the calculated offset - one with a score greater than ten is likely to be correct (at least for audio without similar repeated sections) within the accuracy of the tool; an offset with a score less than five is unlikely to be correct, and a manual check should be carried out.  Note that the value of the score depends on the length of the audio analysed.

The tool uses ffmpeg for transcoding, so should work on all file formats supported by ffmpeg.

Installation
------------

To install from this source directory once downloaded:

    $ pip install .

Or, to install the latest package from PyPi.org:

    $ pip install audio-offset-finder

Usage
-----

    $ audio-offset-finder --help
    $ audio-offset-finder --find-offset-of file1.wav --within file2.wav
    Offset: 12.26 (seconds)
    Standard score: 28.99

    $ audio-offset-finder --find-offset-of file2.wav --within file1.wav
    Offset: -12.26 (seconds)
    Standard score: 28.99

To provide additional information about the accuracy of the result in addition to the standard score, the --plot option shows a plot of the cross-correlation curve.  A single well-defined peak such as is shown in the image below is a good indication that the offset is correct.

<div style="width: 400; align:center">
<img alt="A line graph showing a cross-correlation curve with a sharp prominent peak emerging from low-level noise.  A dotted vertical line is overlaid at the position of the peak, indicating the position of the calculated offset." src="example_plot.png" title="Example correlation plot" />
</div>

Testing
-------

    $ pytest

Licensing terms and authorship
------------------------------

See the 'COPYING' and 'AUTHORS' files.

For details of how to contribute changes, see CONTRIBUTING.md.

The audio file used in the tests was downloaded from
[Wikimedia Commons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Tim_Berners-Lee_-_Today_-_9_July_2008.flac),
and was originally extracted from the 9 July 2008 
episode of the BBC [Today programme](http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00cddwc).

Commit message:

Refactor library so that users can pass in buffers of audio already in memory
Previously the library only worked with audio files on disk.

README.md, after:

audio-offset-finder
===================

A simple tool and library for finding the offset of an audio file within another file.

The algorithm uses cross-correlation of standardised Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients, so it should be relatively robust to noise (encoding, compression, etc).  The accuracy is typically to within about 0.01s.

The tool outputs the calculated offset in seconds, and a ["standard score"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_score) indicating the prominence of the chosen correlation peak.  This can be used as a very rough estimate of the accuracy of the calculated offset - one with a score greater than ten is likely to be correct (at least for audio without similar repeated sections) within the accuracy of the tool; an offset with a score less than five is unlikely to be correct, and a manual check should be carried out.  Note that the value of the score depends on the length of the audio analysed.

The tool uses [FFmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org) for transcoding, so should work on all file formats supported by FFmpeg.  It is tested for compatibility with Python 3.8 and 3.9 on Linux, Windows and macOS.

The aim of this open source project is to provide a simple tool and library that do one job well, and that can be the basis of customisation for more complex use cases.  The [forks of the base respository](https://github.com/bbc/audio-offset-finder/network/members) are worth exploring if you need a feature that is not included here.  The maintainers welcome pull requests with bug fixes, new features and other improvements that fit this philosophy - please see CONTRIBUTING.md for details.

Installation
------------

To install from this source directory once downloaded:

    $ pip install .

Or, to install the latest package from PyPi.org:

    $ pip install audio-offset-finder

You will need to [install FFmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html) to use the command-line tool, or to use the file-related functions in the library.

Usage
-----

To use the command-line tool:

    $ audio-offset-finder --help
    $ audio-offset-finder --find-offset-of file1.wav --within file2.wav --show-plot
    Offset: 12.26 (seconds)
    Standard score: 28.99

    $ audio-offset-finder --find-offset-of file2.wav --within file1.wav --save-plot plot_file.png
    Offset: -12.26 (seconds)
    Standard score: 28.99

To provide additional information about the accuracy of the result in addition to the standard score, the --plot option shows a plot of the cross-correlation curve.  A single well-defined peak such as is shown in the image below is a good indication that the offset is correct.

<div style="width: 400; align:center">
<img alt="A line graph showing a cross-correlation curve with a sharp prominent peak emerging from low-level noise.  A dotted vertical line is overlaid at the position of the peak, indicating the position of the calculated offset." src="example_plot.png" title="Example correlation plot" />
</div>

Library Usage
-------------

To use the Python library:

```python
from audio_offset_finder.audio_offset_finder import find_offset_between_files

results = find_offset_between_files(filepath1, filepath2, trim=30)

print("Offset: %s (seconds)" % str(results["time_offset"]))
print("Standard score: %s" % str(results["standard_score"]))
```
A `find_offset_between_buffers()` function is also provided if you want to find offsets between audio buffers that you already
have in memory.

Testing
-------

    $ pytest

Licensing terms and authorship
------------------------------

See the 'COPYING' and 'AUTHORS' files.

For details of how to contribute changes, see CONTRIBUTING.md.

The audio file used in the tests was downloaded from
[Wikimedia Commons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Tim_Berners-Lee_-_Today_-_9_July_2008.flac),
and was originally extracted from the 9 July 2008 
episode of the BBC [Today programme](http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00cddwc).
